Node.js is a JavaScript runtime built on Chrome's V8 JavaScript engine. It is used to build server-side applications and is commonly used in conjunction with the Express.js web framework. In order to secure a Node.js application, it is important to understand the basics of web application security, such as implementing proper authentication and authorization mechanisms.

One popular library for authentication in Node.js is Passport.js. Passport is a middleware for Node.js that provides a simple way to authenticate users using a variety of different strategies, such as local authentication (username and password), OAuth, and OpenID Connect.

To get started with Passport, you'll first need to install it using npm:

npm install passport

Once installed, you can use Passport's various authentication strategies in your Express.js application. For example, to use the local authentication strategy, you would first configure Passport with the appropriate options and then use it as middleware in your routes:

const passport = require('passport');
const LocalStrategy = require('passport-local').Strategy;

passport.use(new LocalStrategy(
  function(username, password, done) {
    User.findOne({ username: username }, function (err, user) {
      if (err) { return done(err); }
      if (!user) {
        return done(null, false, { message: 'Incorrect username.' });
      }
      if (!user.validPassword(password)) {
        return done(null, false, { message: 'Incorrect password.' });
      }
      return done(null, user);
    });
  }
));

app.post('/login',
  passport.authenticate('local', { successRedirect: '/',
                                   failureRedirect: '/login',
                                   failureFlash: true })
);

Passport also supports many other authentication strategies like OAuth, OpenID and JWT. It is important to use the most appropriate strategy for your application and also validate the input data that is coming from the user.

It is also important to keep the dependencies of your application up-to-date, as new vulnerabilities are often discovered and patched in popular libraries. This can be done by regularly running npm update.

This is just a brief introduction on how Passport.js can be used to authenticate users in a Node.js application. For more detailed information on Passport and web application security, refer to the official Passport.js documentation and best practices for web application security.
